Copilot instructions for pull requests (#25857)
qmk/qmk_firmware: .github/copilot-instructions.md

  - Community Layout macro names when applicable
  - Microcontroller and bootloader specified
  - Diode direction (if not using direct pins)
- **Layout Naming**:
  - Single layout: Use `LAYOUT` or community layout name
  - Multiple layouts: Include `LAYOUT_all` + alternate names
  - Prefer community layout names (e.g., `LAYOUT_tkl_ansi`, `LAYOUT_ortho_4x4`)
- **Configuration in info.json or keyboard.json** (when applicable):
  - Direct pin configuration
  - Backlight, Split keyboard, Encoder, Bootmagic configs
  - LED Indicator, RGB Light, RGB Matrix configs
- **Format**: Run `qmk format-json -i` before submitting

### USB VID/PID Uniqueness
VID+PID combination must be unique across all keyboards. Individual VID or PID values can be reused with different partners.
**Validation Steps:**
1. Extract VID and PID from keyboard.json/info.json in the PR
2. Search for existing usage: `grep -r '"vid".*"0xVVVV"' keyboards/ --include="*.json" | grep -l '"pid".*"0xPPPP"'`
3. If results found: Check if BOTH VID AND PID match in same file
   - Both match = **COLLISION** - request different PID
   - Only one matches = **OK** - different keyboards can share individual values

> 4. For keyboard variants/revisions: Each must have different PID under same VID

Reviewer: Not sure we need a new PID here; if a rev1 and rev2 have different hardware assignments and are otherwise functionally identical, we can probably relax this?

- **Minimal Code**: Only critical board boot code required
- **No Vial**: Vial-related files/changes not accepted

### Keyboard Implementation Files

#### `<keyboard>.c`
- **Remove Empty Functions**: Delete empty or commented-out weak-defined functions
  - `xxxx_xxxx_kb()`, `xxxx_xxxx_user()` implementations
- **Migration**: `matrix_init_board()` → `keyboard_pre_init_kb()`
- **Custom Matrix**: Use `lite` variant when possible for standard debounce
  - `CUSTOM_MATRIX = lite` preferred
  - Full custom matrix (`yes`) requires justification
- **LED Indicators**: Prefer Configuration Options over custom `led_update_*()` implementations
- **Hardware Configuration**: Basic functionality for OLED, encoders, etc. at keyboard level

#### `<keyboard>.h`
- **Include**: `#include "quantum.h"` at top
- **Layout Macros**: Move to `info.json` or `keyboard.json` (no longer in header)

### Default Keymap Standards

**Scope**: These rules specifically apply to files within `keyboards/*/keymaps/default/` directories.

- **Pristine Requirement**: Bare minimum clean slate
  - No custom keycodes
  - No advanced features (tap dance, macros)
  - Basic mod taps and home row mods acceptable when necessary

>   - Standard layouts preferred

Author: Added reference folder for this line.

- **Removed Examples**: Delete `QMKBEST`/`QMKURL` macros
- **Tri Layer**: Use Tri Layer feature instead of manual `layer_on/off()` + `update_tri_layer()`

> - **Encoder Map**: Use encoder map feature, not `encoder_update_user()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Encoder Map**: Use encoder map feature, `encoder_update_user()` may not be present
```

  - PRs with multiple areas will be asked to split
  - Keyboard/keymap changes only if affecting base builds or default-like keymaps
  - Keymap modifications (non-default) should be followup PR after core merge
  - Large refactoring PRs affecting other keymaps raised separately

### Testing Requirements
- **New Hardware Support**: Requires test keyboard under `keyboards/handwired/onekey`
  - New MCUs: Add child keyboard targeting new MCU for build verification
  - New hardware (displays, matrix, peripherals): Provide associated keymap
  - Exception: If existing keymap can leverage functionality (consult Collaborators)
- **Callbacks**: New `_kb`/`_user` callbacks must return `bool` for user override
- **Unit Tests**: Strongly recommended, may be required
  - Critical code areas (keycode pipeline) will require tests
  - Boost confidence in current and future correctness

### Code Quality
- **Subjective Review**: Other requirements at QMK Collaborators' discretion
- **Documentation**: Core changes should be well-documented

---

## Automated Review Checklist

When reviewing PRs, check the following systematically:

### File Changes Review

> 1. **License headers** on all C/H files (GPL2+ preferred, SPDX acceptable)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **License headers** on all C/H files (GPL2+ preferred, others must be GPL2+ compatible, SPDX format preferred)
```

2. **File naming** lowercase (flag exceptions needing justification)
3. **Include guards** use `#pragma once`
4. **No low-level hardware access** (GPIO, I2C, SPI direct calls)
5. **Timing abstractions** (`wait_ms()`, `timer_read()` usage)

### info.json and keyboard.json Validation

> 1. **Schema Compliance**: Validates against `data/schemas/keyboard.jsonschema`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Schema Compliance**: `keyboard.json` and `info.json` files validate against `data/schemas/keyboard.jsonschema`
  - Both files are identical syntax, however the `keyboard.json` dictates a buildable target, `info.json` does not
```
